Ivana Marie "Ivanka" Trump (; born October 30, 1981) is an American businesswoman, fashion designer, author, reality television personality, and politician. She is the daughter of President Donald Trump and Donald's first wife Ivana. She is the first Jewish member of a First Family, having converted before marrying her Jewish husband, Jared Kushner.Trump is a fourth generation businessperson who followed in the footsteps of her great-grandmother Elizabeth, grandfather Fred, and father, serving for a time as an executive vice president of the family-owned Trump Organization. She was also a boardroom judge on her father's TV show The Apprentice.Starting in March 2017, she left the Trump Organization and began serving in her father's presidential administration as an adviser alongside her husband. She assumed this official, unpaid position after ethics concerns were raised about her having access to classified material while not being held to the same restrictions as a federal employee. She was considered part of the president's inner circle even before becoming an official employee in his administration.


== Early life ==
Ivana Marie Trump was born in Manhattan, New York City, and is the second child of Czech-American model Ivana (née Zelníčková) and Donald Trump, who in 2017 became the 45th president of the United States. Her father has German and Scottish ancestry and her mother has Czech and Austrian ancestry. For most of her life, she has been nicknamed "Ivanka," a diminutive form of Ivana. Trump's parents divorced in 1992 when she was ten years old. She has two brothers, Donald Jr. and Eric, a half-sister, Tiffany, and a half-brother, Barron.
Trump attended the Chapin School in Manhattan until she was 15, when she transferred to Choate Rosemary Hall in Wallingford, Connecticut. She characterized Choate's "boarding-school life" as being like a "prison", while her "friends in New York were having fun".After graduating from Choate, she attended Georgetown University for two years, then transferred to the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania, from which she graduated cum laude with a bachelor's degree in economics in 2004. Her father had also transferred to Wharton after two years at another institution.


== Career ==


=== Business ===
Trump briefly worked for Forest City Enterprises. In 2005, she joined the family business as Executive Vice President of Development & Acquisitions at The Trump Organization.In 2007, she formed a partnership with Dynamic Diamond Corp., the company of diamond vendor Moshe Lax, to create Ivanka Trump Fine Jewelry, a line of diamond and gold jewelry sold at her first flagship retail store in Manhattan. In November 2011, her retail flagship moved from Madison Avenue to 109 Mercer Street, a larger space in the fashionable Soho district.In December 2012, members of 100 Women in Hedge Funds elected Ivanka Trump to their board.On October 2, 2015, it was reported that "Ivanka Trump's flagship store on Mercer Street appear[s] to be closed" and, noting that the shop had been "stripped clean". In October 2016, the only dedicated retail shop and flagship boutique for Ivanka Trump Fine Jewelry was located at Trump Tower in Manhattan, New York City, with her brand also being available at Hudson's Bay and fine-jewelry stores throughout the U.S. and Canada, as well as in Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates.She also had her own line of Ivanka Trump fashion items, including clothes, handbags, shoes, and accessories, available in major U.S. and Canadian department stores including Macy's and Hudson's Bay. Her brand was criticized for allegedly copying designs by other designers, and by PETA and other animal rights activists for using fur from rabbits. In 2016, the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission recalled Ivanka Trump-branded scarves because they did not meet federal flammability standards. A 2016 analysis found that most of the fashion line was produced outside the U.S. Ivanka Trump-brand shoes have been supplied by Chengdu Kameido Shoes in Sichuan and Hangzhou HS Fashion (via G-III Apparel Group) in Zhejiang.In February 2017, department store chains Neiman Marcus and Nordstrom dropped Trump's fashion line, citing "poor performance."On February 9, 2017, Presidential Advisor Kellyanne Conway controversially encouraged Fox News viewers to purchase Trump's retail products. In June 2017, three people with the organization called China Labor Watch were arrested by Chinese authorities while investigating Huajian International, which makes shoes for several American brands, including Ivanka Trump's brand. The Trump Administration called for their release.On July 24, 2018, Trump announced that she shut down her company after deciding to pursue a career in public policy instead of returning to her fashion business.


=== Modeling ===

When Trump was attending boarding school as a teenager, she got into modeling "on weekends and holidays and absolutely not during the school year," according to her mother, Ivana Trump. She was featured in print advertisements for Tommy Hilfiger and Sasson Jeans and walked fashion runways for Versace, Marc Bouwer and Thierry Mugler. In May 1997, she was featured on the cover of Seventeen which ran a story on "celeb moms & daughters".Trump joined the Trump Organization in an executive position. Soon after that, she started her jewelry, shoe, and apparel lines, and appeared in advertisements promoting the Trump Organization and her products. She was also featured in women's and special interest publications in "soft-hitting" profiles focusing on "looks, lifestyles, and product lines" and was featured on the cover of some issues, such as Harper's Bazaar, Forbes Life, Golf Magazine, Town & Country, and Vogue.She was featured on the cover of Stuff in August 2006 and again in September 2007.


=== Television ===


==== The Apprentice ====
In 2006, Trump filled in for Carolyn Kepcher on five episodes of her father's television program The Apprentice 5, first appearing to help judge the Gillette task in week 2. Like Kepcher, Trump visited the site of the tasks and spoke to the teams. Trump collaborated with season 5 winner Sean Yazbeck on his winner's project of choice, Trump SoHo Hotel-Condominium.She replaced Kepcher as a primary boardroom judge during the sixth season of The Apprentice and its follow-up iteration, Celebrity Apprentice.


==== Other TV appearances ====
In 1997, at the age of 15, Trump co-hosted the Miss Teen USA Pageant, which was partially owned by her father, Donald Trump, from 1996 to 2005.In 2006, she was a guest judge on Project Runway's third season and on season 4 of Project Runway All Stars.In 2010, Trump and her husband briefly portrayed themselves in Season 4 Episode 6 of Gossip Girl.


=== Books ===
In October 2009, Trump's first self-help book, The Trump Card: Playing to Win in Work and Life, was published; according to ghostwriter Daniel Paisner, he co-wrote the book.In May 2017, her second self-help book, Women Who Work: Rewriting the Rules for Success, was published; she used the services of a writer, a researcher, and a fact-checker.


== Trump campaign and administration ==


=== 2016 presidential campaign and election ===
In 2015, she publicly endorsed her father's presidential campaign. She was involved with the campaign by making public appearances to support him and defend him. However, she admitted mixed feelings about his presidential ambitions, saying in October 2015, "As a citizen, I love what he's doing. As a daughter, it's obviously more complicated." In August 2015, Donald Trump stated that she was his leading advisor on "women's health and women" and said it was she who propelled him to elaborate on his views of women.

In January 2016, Trump was featured in a radio ad that aired in the early voting states of Iowa and New Hampshire, in which she praised her father. She appeared by his side following the results of early voting states in 2016, in particular briefly speaking in South Carolina. She was not able to vote in the New York primary in April 2016 because she had missed the October 2015 deadline to change her registration from independent to Republican.Trump introduced her father in a speech immediately before his own speech at the 2016 Republican National Convention (RNC) in July. The George Harrison song "Here Comes the Sun" was used as her entrance music. She stated, "One of my father's greatest talents is the ability to see the potential in people", and said he would "Make America Great Again." Her speech was well received as portraying Donald Trump "in a warmer-than-usual light", according to the Washington Post. An earlier Post article had questioned whether the policy positions Ivanka Trump espoused were closer to those of Hillary Clinton than to those of her father. After the speech, the George Harrison estate complained about the use of his song as being offensive to their wishes. The next morning, Ivanka's official Twitter account tweeted, "Shop Ivanka's look from her #RNC speech" with a link to a Macy's page that featured the dress she wore.After her father's election, Trump wore a bracelet on a family appearance with the president-elect on 60 Minutes. Her company then used an email blast to promote the bracelet. After critiques for "monetization", the company quickly apologized, calling the publicity the work of "a well-intentioned marketing employee at one of our companies who was following customary protocol." A spokeswoman said the company was, post-election, "proactively discussing new policies and procedures with all of our partners going forward."Trump has collected the work of artists who have protested to her directly following her father's election victory. In January 2017, artist Richard Prince returned a $36,000 payment he received for a work featuring Ivanka and disavowed its creation. Other artists joined behind a movement created by the Halt Action Group called @dear_ivanka, which aimed to change Trump's policies by appealing to Ivanka. Among its supporters were contemporary artist Alex Da Corte who told Trump to stay away from his paintings after she appeared in front of one on a social media post.On Friday, January 20, 2017, she attended the inauguration of Donald Trump as the 45th president of the United States, at the United States Capitol Building in Washington, D.C.. Ivanka Trump partly negotiated rates of hotel rooms, rental spaces, and meals at the Trump International Hotel in Washington DC on which her father's inaugural committee spent funds, WNYC and ProPublica reported in December 2018. She has been mentioned with regards to the links between Trump associates and Russian officials.


=== Advisor to the President of the United States ===
In January 2017, Trump resigned from her position at the Trump Organization. The organization also removed images of Trump and her father from their websites, in accordance with official advice on federal ethics rules. In the early months of her father's presidency, some commented that she was filling a quasi-First Lady role while First Lady Melania Trump remained in New York City (her son Barron completed the school year in New York before the First Lady moved to Washington); Trump stated that she had no intention of being First Lady.

After advising her father in an unofficial capacity for the first two months of his administration, Trump was appointed Advisor to the President, a government employee, on March 29, 2017. She takes no salary. Prior to becoming a federal employee, she used a personal email for government work.Amid the contentious early months of her father's administration, some commentators compared her role in the administration to that of Julie Nixon Eisenhower, daughter of President Richard Nixon. Nixon Eisenhower was one of the Nixon administration's most vocal defenders, and Trump defended the Trump administration and her father personally against a myriad of allegations. Washington Post opinion columnist Alyssa Rosenberg wrote, "Both daughters served as important validators for their fathers."In early April 2017, the government of China extended trademarks to Trump's businesses. On the same day, Donald Trump hosted Chinese President Xi Jinping at Mar-a-Lago and Trump and Kushner sat next to the Chinese leader and his wife Peng Liyuan at the state dinner. Also during the visit, Trump and Kushner's five-year-old daughter Arabella "sang a traditional Chinese song, in Mandarin, [for Xi]. The video, which was lavishly praised by Chinese state media, played over 2.2 million times on China's popular news portal", Tencent QQ.

In late April 2017, Trump hired Julie Radford as her chief of staff. Before the end of the month, Trump and Radford had plans to travel with Dina Powell and Hope Hicks to the first W20 women's summit. The W20 was organized by the National Council of German Women's Organizations and the Association of German Women Entrepreneurs as one of the preparatory meetings leading up to the G20 head-of-state summit in July. At the conference, Trump spoke about women's rights; she was booed by the audience when she praised her father as an advocate for women.It was announced by Donald Trump that his daughter would lead the U.S. delegation to India in the fall in a global support of women's entrepreneurship. In response to the announcement, an Indian diplomat was quoted as stating, "We regard Ivanka Trump the way we do half-wit Saudi princes. It's in our national interest to flatter them."Biographer and journalist Michael Wolff wrote a book based on numerous interviews with members of Donald Trump's circle. In the book, Wolff claims—but cites no sources—that Trump and her husband reached a deal that "[i]f sometime in the future the opportunity arose, she'd be the one to run for president".She also received criticism on Twitter for acting as Secretary of State after the firing of Rex Tillerson by meeting with the South Korean foreign minister.In November 2018 The Washington Post reported that Trump conducted official government business through her personal email, possibly in violation of federal records rules, which require such communications to be sent within 20 days to a work account for permanent archival. A spokesman for Trump's ethics counsel stated that before she was told of the rules, "Trump sometimes used her personal account, almost always for logistics and scheduling concerning her family", and that the emails did not have classified information.


== Social and political causes ==

In 2007, Trump donated $1,000 to the presidential campaign of Hillary Clinton. In 2012, Trump endorsed Mitt Romney for president. In 2013, Trump and her husband hosted a fundraiser for Democrat Cory Booker, and the couple bundled more than $40,000 for Booker's U.S. Senate campaign. Trump advocates for women and Israel. At the 2016 Republican National Convention, Trump said of her political views: "Like many of my fellow millennials, I do not consider myself categorically Republican or Democrat."


=== Philanthropy ===
Trump was a member of the Donald J. Trump Foundation board until the foundation was dissolved after New York Attorney General Barbara Underwood filed a civil lawsuit against the foundation, alleging "persistently illegal conduct" with respect to the foundation's money.Trump also has ties to a number of Jewish charities, including Chai Lifeline, a charity which helps to look after children with cancer. Other charities she supports include United Hatzalah, to which her father, Donald Trump, has reportedly made six-figure donations in the past.After she was appointed Advisor to the President, Trump donated the unpaid half of the advance payments for her book Women Who Work: Rewriting the Rules for Success to the National Urban League and the Boys and Girls Clubs of America. She further said that any royalties exceeding the advances would also be given to charity.


== Personal life ==

In January 2017 it was announced that Trump and her husband had made arrangements to establish a family home in the Kalorama neighborhood of Washington, DC. Federal filings implied that, in 2017, Trump and her husband may have assets upwards of $740 million.According to her mother, Ivanka speaks French and understands Czech.Sarah Ellison, writing for Vanity Fair in 2018, indicated Ivanka Trump was the family member whom "everyone in the family seems to acknowledge" is Donald Trump's "favorite" child. This had been confirmed by the family members themselves in a 2015 interview with Barbara Walters on network television where the siblings were gathered and acknowledged that she was the favorite among the siblings.


=== Relationships ===
During college, Trump was in a nearly four-year relationship with Greg Hersch, an investment banker at Salomon Brothers, Bear Stearns, and UBS. From 2001 to 2005, she dated James "Bingo" Gubelmann.In 2005, she started dating real estate developer Jared Kushner, whom she met through mutual friends. The couple broke up in 2008 due to the objections of Kushner's parents, but got back together and married in a Jewish ceremony on October 25, 2009. They have three children, a daughter born in July 2011and two sons born in October 2013and March 2016. In an interview on The Dr. Oz Show, Trump revealed that she had suffered from postpartum depression after each of her pregnancies.Trump has a close relationship with her father, who has publicly expressed his admiration for her on several occasions. Ivanka has likewise praised her father, complimenting his leadership skills and saying he empowers other people.


=== Religion ===

Trump was raised as a Presbyterian Christian. She converted to Orthodox Judaism in July 2009, after studying with Elie Weinstock from the Modern Orthodox Ramaz School. Trump took the Hebrew name "Yael". She describes her conversion as an "amazing and beautiful journey" which her father supported "from day one", adding that he has "tremendous respect" for the Jewish religion. She attests to keeping a kosher diet and observing the Jewish Sabbath, saying in 2015: "We're pretty observant... It's been such a great life decision for me... I really find that with Judaism, it creates an amazing blueprint for family connectivity. From Friday to Saturday we don't do anything but hang out with one another. We don't make phone calls." When living in New York City, Trump used to send her daughter to kindergarten at a Jewish school. She said: "It's such a blessing for me to have her come home every night and share with me the Hebrew that she's learned and sing songs for me around the holidays."Trump and her husband made a pilgrimage to the grave of the Lubavitcher Rebbe, a popular prayer site, shortly before her father's election victory. On May 22, 2017, Trump and Kushner also traveled with her father on the first official visit to Israel by the Trump administration, when her father made the first visit to the Western Wall by a sitting U.S. president. Ivanka also visited the Yad Vashem Holocaust memorial in western Jerusalem and the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in the Christian Quarter of the Old City of Jerusalem during the trip.She has been mentioned with regards to the United States recognition of Jerusalem as capital of Israel.


== Awards and nominations ==
In 2012, The Wharton Club of New York, the official alumni association of the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania for the New York metropolitan area, gave Trump the Joseph Wharton Award for Young Leadership, one of their four annual awards for Wharton alumni.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website (archived)
Ivanka Trump on IMDb 
Appearances on C-SPAN