School strike for climate, also known in various regions as Fridays for Future, Youth for Climate or Youth Strike 4 Climate, is a growing international movement of pupils and students who are deciding not to attend classes and instead take part in demonstrations to demand action to prevent further global warming and climate change. Publicity and widespread organising began when Greta Thunberg staged an action outside the Swedish Riksdag (parliament), holding a sign that read "Skolstrejk för klimatet" or "School strike for climate" during August 2018.


== History ==
On 20 August 2018, Greta Thunberg, then in ninth grade, decided to not attend school until the 2018 Sweden general election on 9 September after heat waves and wildfires in Sweden. She asserts that this move was inspired by the teen activists at Parkland Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Florida, who organised the March for our lives. Her demands were that the Swedish government reduce carbon emissions per the Paris Agreement, and she protested by sitting outside the Riksdag every day during school hours with the sign Skolstrejk för klimatet (school strike for the climate). On 7 September, just before the general elections, she announced that she would continue to strike every Friday until Sweden aligns with the Paris Agreement. She coined the slogan FridaysForFuture, which gained worldwide attention. She inspired school students across the globe to take part in student strikes.


=== Climate Strike 2015 ===
In 2015, a independent group of students invited students around the world to skip school on the first day of COP 21, the UNFCCC Climate Conference. On 30 November, the first day of Climate Conference in Paris, 'Climate Strike' was organized in over 100 countries and joined by over 50000 people. The movement focused on three demands, 100% clean energy, keeping fossil fuels in the ground, and helping climate refugees.


=== 2018 ===

Inspired by Greta Thunberg, massive school strikes started in November 2018. In Australia, thousands of school students were inspired by Thunberg to strike on Fridays, ignoring Prime Minister Scott Morrison's call for "more learning in schools and less activism". In December student strikes continued at least in 270 cities in countries including Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, the Netherlands, Germany, Finland, Denmark, Japan, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.


=== 2019 ===

In 2019, strikes were organised again in the countries listed above and were organised for the first time in other countries, notably: Colombia, New Zealand and Uganda.The largest mass strikes to date happened on 17-18 January, when at least 45000 students came out to protest in Switzerland and Germany alone, against insufficient policies on global warming.In several countries, including Germany and the UK, pupils asked to change laws to reduce the voting age down to 16 years so they could influence public elections in favour of the youth.Belgian environment minister for Flanders Joke Schauvliege resigned on 5 February 2019 after falsely claiming the state security agency had evidence that the school strikes in Belgium were a "set‑up".In early February 2019, 350 Dutch scientists signed an open letter in support of the school strikes in the Netherlands. The letter reads "On the basis of the facts supplied by climate science, the campaigners are right. That is why we, as scientists, support them."In England, on the 13 February 2019, following the open letters supporting Extinction Rebellion in 2018, 224 academics signed an open letter giving their "full support to the students" attending the School Strike for Climate action.Climate scientist Stefan Rahmstorf, Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, addressed a Fridays for Future climate strike in Potsdam, Germany on 15 February 2019.Nationwide strikes in the UK, expected in more than 30 locations on Friday, 15 February, saw more than 60 actions in towns and cities, with an estimated 15000 taking part.On 5 March 2019, 700 German researchers signed a petition in support of the school strikes in that country.On 21 February, 2019, the European Union chief executive, Jean-Claude Juncker, stated intent to spend hundreds of billions of euros on climate  change mitigation, amounting to a fourth of the EU budget. He announced this in a speech next to Greta Thunberg, and media credited the school strike movement with this announcement.


==== Earth Strike ====
Friday 15 March 2019 is expected to be the most widespread of strikes, with tens of thousands of children in at least two dozen countries and nearly 30 US states projected to walk out of school, supported by some of the world's biggest environmental groups. As of 3 March, the website FridaysForFuture.org lists 450 events planned in 54 countries.On 1 March 2019, 150 students from the global coordination group of the youth-led climate strike (of 15 March), including Greta Thunberg, issued an open letter in The Guardian, saying:
We, the young, are deeply concerned about our future. […] We are the voiceless future of humanity. We will no longer accept this injustice. […] We finally need to treat the climate crisis as a crisis. It is the biggest threat in human history and we will not accept the world's decision-makers' inaction that threatens our entire civilisation. […] Climate change is already happening. People did die, are dying and will die because of it, but we can and will stop this madness. […] United we will rise until we see climate justice. We demand the world's decision-makers take responsibility and solve this crisis. You have failed us in the past. If you continue failing us in the future, we, the young people, will make change happen by ourselves. The youth of this world has started to move and we will not rest again.


== By country ==


== Criticism ==
The strikes have also been criticised as truancy by a range of different groups. In New-Zealand, students were threatened to be marked as truants for attending the strike without their parents' or schools permission. Prime Minster Theresa May of the United Kingdom also criticised the strikes as wasting lesson and teaching time.


== See also ==
Climate movement
Climate justice
Individual action on climate change
Individual and political action on climate change
Commission on Growth, Structural Change and Employment (Germany)


== References ==


== External links ==
By countrySchool Strike 4 Climate (Australia)
Youth 4 Climate (Belgium)
(in German) Fridays for Future (Germany)
(in German) Klimastreik (Switzerland)
Youth Strike 4 Climate (UK)
Google map showing climate strikes worldwideOther"School Strike for Climate" (TED talk by Greta Thunberg)