Tiffany Ariana Trump (born October 13, 1993) is an American socialite, model, and Georgetown Law student in Washington, D.C., and the daughter of President Donald Trump and Marla Maples. With her father's inauguration as President on January 20, 2017, she became a member of the First Family of the United States.


== Early life and education ==
Tiffany Ariana Trump was born on October 13, 1993, at St. Mary's Medical Center in West Palm Beach, Florida. She is Donald Trump's only child with his second wife, actress and TV personality Marla Maples, whom he married in December 1993. She was named after Tiffany & Company (her father purchased the air rights above the Fifth Avenue jewelry store in the 1980s in order to build Trump Tower). Her parents divorced in 1999 after being separated for two years.
She was raised by her mother in California.She has three older half-siblings, Don Jr., Ivanka and Eric, from Donald's first wife Ivana, and a younger half-brother, Barron, from Trump's third wife Melania.She attended Viewpoint School in Calabasas, California. In 2016, she received a Bachelor of Arts degree from the University of Pennsylvania, where she double majored in Sociology (with a concentration in Law & Society) and Urban Studies, and was a sister of Kappa Alpha Theta sorority. She began attending Georgetown Law School in Washington, D.C. in 2017.


== 2016 presidential campaign ==

Her father's 2016 presidential campaign was formally launched on June 16, 2015. During the 2016 presidential election, she joined her father and other members of the Trump family at campaign appearances.She spoke at the 2016 Republican National Convention on the second night of the convention. During her speech, Tiffany said of her unfamiliarity with the situation, stating: "Please excuse me if I'm a little nervous. When I graduated college a couple of months ago, I never expected to be here tonight addressing the nation. I've given a few speeches in front of classrooms and students, but never in an arena with more than 10 million people watching."The 58th quadrennial presidential election was held on Tuesday, November 8, 2016. She voted in New York as a member of the Republican Party.


== Career ==
In 2011, Trump released a music single called "Like a Bird." She later told The Oprah Winfrey Show that she was evaluating whether to take her music career "to the next level as a professional".In 2015, Trump worked as an intern at Vogue and modeled for a 2016 Andrew Warren fashion show during New York Fashion Week.


== In the media ==
Trump is a frequent poster to Instagram, where, as of  December 2018, she had 1,000,000 followers. Her Instagram posts frequently include photographs of her with friends or with other people known mostly for having famous parents or grandparents, including Kyra Kennedy, granddaughter of Robert F. Kennedy; Gaïa Jacquet-Matisse, great-great-granddaughter of artist Henri Matisse; Ezra J. William, son of an Indonesian real estate businessman; and EJ Johnson, son of Magic Johnson. The group, whose posed photos are edited by Andrew Warren, has been named the "rich kids of Instagram" by the New York Post and the "Snap Pack" by The New York Times and New York magazine.


== See also ==
List of Kappa Alpha Theta sisters
List of children of the Presidents of the United States


== References ==


== External links ==
Tiffany Trump on IMDb